.TH MOSS 1 "2025-01-01" "mOSs v1.0" "mOSs Reference Manual"
.SH NAME
moss \- mOSs Native System Environment — shell, SDK, and CLI reference
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B moss-shell
.RB [ \-\-color
.IR color ]
.RB [ \-\-crt
.IR mode ]
.RB [ \-\-mode
.IR terminal | wm ]

.B moss-fetch
.RB [ \-\-json ]
.RB [ \-\-cpu ]
.RB [ \-\-mem ]

.B moss-bridge
.RB [ \-\-socket
.IR path ]
.RB [ \-\-daemonize ]

.B moss-config
.B get
.I key
|
.B set
.I key value

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mOSs
is a custom bootable Linux distribution designed around a terminal-green
CRT-aesthetic.  It boots directly into the
.B moss-shell
— a native ncurses TUI that replicates the web-based
.IR mOSs
interface in full hardware isolation.

.PP
The system consists of four major components:

.TP
.B moss-shell
The primary user environment.  Provides two modes:
.RS
.TP
.I terminal
Full-screen shell with scrollback, command history, tab-completion, and
VT-style CRT rendering.
.TP
.I wm
Floating-window manager with a Start Menu, draggable windows, and built-in
apps (system info, task manager, file manager, clock, calculator, notes,
games, settings).
.RE

.TP
.B moss-bridge
Background daemon (started by
.BR /init )
that continuously polls
.I /proc
and
.I /sys
for live hardware metrics.  Serves JSON via a Unix socket at
.IR /run/moss-bridge.sock .
Also manages an SQLite3 database
.RI ( /var/lib/moss/moss.db )
for high-scores, AMA messages, and user configuration.

.TP
.B libmoss
C SDK for writing native mOSs applications.  Provides windowing, drawing,
terminal emulation, system info, ASCII art rendering, score submission,
and CRT effects.  Link with
.IR \-lmoss\ \-lncurses .

.TP
.B moss-fetch
.BR neofetch -style
system information display.  Queries
.B moss-bridge
for real-time data and renders it alongside the mOSs ASCII eye logo.

.SH SHELL COMMANDS
.TP
.B ls \fR[\fI-l\fR|\fI-a\fR|\fI-la\fR]
List files in the current virtual directory.
.TP
.B cat \fIfile\fR
Print file contents to the terminal.
.TP
.B cd \fIdir\fR
Change the current directory.
.TP
.B pwd
Print working directory.
.TP
.B touch \fIfile\fR
Create an empty file.
.TP
.B mkdir \fIdir\fR
Create a directory.
.TP
.B mv \fIsrc dst\fR
Move or rename a file.
.TP
.B rm \fR[\fI-rf\fR] \fIfile\fR
Remove a file or directory.
.TP
.B nano \fIfile\fR
Open a minimal full-screen text editor.
.TP
.B echo \fItext\fR
Print text.  Synonym:
.BR say .
.TP
.B date
Show current date and time.
.TP
.B whoami
Show the current username.
.TP
.B clear
Clear the terminal scrollback.
.TP
.B fetch
Display system information in neofetch layout.
.TP
.B color \fIname\fR
Set the global accent colour.
.IR name " may be: " green ", " red ", " yellow ", " blue ", " cyan ", " white ", " magenta .
.TP
.B crt \fR[\fIoff\fR|\fIlight\fR|\fIstrong\fR]
Set the CRT effect mode.  Default: light.
.TP
.B bg \fR[\fIon\fR|\fIoff\fR|\fIstatus\fR]
Toggle the background image.
.TP
.B size \fIN\fR
Display a note about font size.  Actual size depends on the terminal emulator.
.TP
.B wm
Enter the Window Manager mode.  Press F4 or Ctrl-Q to return to the shell.
.TP
.B startup \fR[\fIterminal\fR|\fIwm\fR]
Display or set the default startup mode.
.TP
.B login
Prompt for a new username/password.  Usernames other than
.B moss
(password:
.IR moss )
are treated as guest accounts.
.TP
.B logout
Log out and return to the login screen.
.TP
.B reboot
Reboot the system.
.TP
.B shutdown
Power off the system.
.TP
.B meow
Display a cat ASCII art.
.TP
.B ferris
Display Ferris the crab (Rust mascot).
.TP
.B gay
Display a six-colour pride flag.
.TP
.B bounce
Launch a bouncing animation (fun easter egg).
.TP
.B hits
Increment and display the visit counter.
.TP
.B ama
Open the Ask Me Anything form.  Submissions are stored in
.IR /var/lib/moss/moss.db .
.TP
.B mine \fR|\fB snake \fR|\fB tetris \fR|\fB 2048 \fR|\fB pong
Launch a built-in game (available in WM mode).
.TP
.B help
Display this command reference.
.TP
.B man \fImoss\fR
Display this manual page.

.SH WINDOW MANAGER KEYBINDINGS
.TP
.B F1
Toggle Start Menu.
.TP
.B F2
Close focused window.
.TP
.B F3
Cycle focus to next window.
.TP
.B F4 / Ctrl-Q
Exit Window Manager, return to terminal shell.
.TP
.B Ctrl-H/J/K/L
Move focused window left/down/up/right.
.TP
.B 1\(en9
Quick-open Start Menu entry by index.

.SH CONFIGURATION
mOSs configuration is stored at
.IR /etc/moss/config.json .
Keys:
.TP
.B terminal_color
Hex accent colour, e.g.
.IR "#00ff00" .
.TP
.B crt_effect
.IR off ", " light ", or " strong .
.TP
.B background_enabled
.IR true " or " false .
.TP
.B startup_mode
.IR terminal " or " wm .
.TP
.B audio_enabled
.IR true " or " false .
.PP
Use
.B moss-config get \fIkey\fR
and
.B moss-config set \fIkey value\fR
to read and write values.  Changes take effect on next boot or shell restart.

.SH PROGRAMMING GUIDE — HELLO WORLD
.PP
A minimal mOSs application using libmoss:

.PP
.nf
.RS
/* hello.c */
#include <moss.h>

int main(void) {
    MOSS_Ctx    *ctx = moss_init();
    MOSS_Window *win = moss_create_window(ctx, "Hello mOSs", 40, 10);

    moss_set_color(win, MOSS_COLOR_GREEN, MOSS_COLOR_BLACK);
    moss_set_attr(win, MOSS_ATTR_BOLD);
    moss_print(win, 2, 4, "Hello from mOSs!");

    moss_set_attr(win, MOSS_ATTR_NORMAL);
    moss_print(win, 4, 4, "Press ESC or Ctrl-Q to quit.");

    /* Load ASCII art */
    MOSS_AsciiArt *art = moss_ascii_load(NULL);
    if (art) moss_draw_ascii(win, art, "eye", 6, 2, MOSS_COLOR_GREEN);

    /* Display live CPU usage */
    MOSS_SysInfo *si = moss_sysinfo_get();
    if (si) {
        moss_printf(win, 8, 4, "CPU: %d%%", moss_sysinfo_cpu_pct(si));
        moss_sysinfo_free(si);
    }

    moss_window_show(win);
    moss_event_loop(ctx);   /* blocks until ESC */

    moss_window_destroy(win);
    moss_ascii_destroy(art);
    moss_destroy(ctx);
    return 0;
}
.RE
.fi

.PP
Compile on mOSs:
.PP
.nf
.RS
gcc -O2 hello.c -lmoss -lncurses -lm -o hello
./hello
.RE
.fi

.SH SDK REFERENCE (SUMMARY)
.TP
.B moss_init()
Initialise rendering context; call once at startup.
.TP
.B moss_destroy(ctx)
Tear down context; restore terminal.
.TP
.B moss_event_loop(ctx)
Run blocking event loop until quit.
.TP
.B moss_create_window(ctx, title, w, h)
Create a floating window.  0 for w/h = full screen.
.TP
.B moss_window_show(win)
Make window visible.
.TP
.B moss_print(win, row, col, text)
Draw text at a position inside the window.
.TP
.B moss_printf(win, row, col, fmt, ...)
printf-style text drawing.
.TP
.B moss_set_color(win, fg, bg)
Set foreground and background colour for subsequent draws.
.TP
.B moss_set_attr(win, attr)
Set text attributes (BOLD, DIM, UNDERLINE, BLINK, REVERSE).
.TP
.B moss_draw_progress_bar(win, row, col, width, pct, color)
Render a [====    ] bar.
.TP
.B moss_sysinfo_get()
Query moss-bridge for a live metrics snapshot.
.TP
.B moss_ascii_load(cfg)
Load /usr/share/moss/ascii/ascii_art.json.
.TP
.B moss_ascii_get(art, name)
Retrieve a named art string.
.TP
.B moss_draw_ascii(win, art, name, row, col, color)
Render ASCII art into a window.
.TP
.B moss_set_crt_mode(ctx, mode)
Set CRT effect: MOSS_CRT_OFF / MOSS_CRT_LIGHT / MOSS_CRT_STRONG.
.TP
.B moss_scores_get(game, n, out)
Fetch the top-n high scores for a game.
.TP
.B moss_scores_submit(game, username, score)
Submit a new high score.
.TP
.B moss_config_load()
Parse /etc/moss/config.json.
.TP
.B moss_config_get_str(cfg, key, default)
Read a string config value.

.SH FILES
.TP
.I /init
Custom PID-1 init script.
.TP
.I /bin/moss-shell
Native mOSs shell binary.
.TP
.I /bin/moss-bridge
System metrics daemon.
.TP
.I /bin/moss-fetch
System info CLI.
.TP
.I /lib/libmoss.so.1
Shared SDK library.
.TP
.I /lib/libmoss.a
Static SDK library.
.TP
.I /etc/moss/config.json
Per-system configuration.
.TP
.I /var/lib/moss/moss.db
SQLite3 database (scores, AMA, config).
.TP
.I /run/moss-bridge.sock
Unix socket for bridge IPC.
.TP
.I /usr/share/moss/ascii/ascii_art.json
ASCII art resource file.
.TP
.I /usr/share/moss/sounds/chime.mp3
Boot chime audio.
.TP
.I /usr/share/moss/bg.png
Background image used in GRUB theme.
.TP
.I /boot/grub/grub.cfg
GRUB 2 bootloader configuration.

.SH BOOT SEQUENCE
.PP
.nf
BIOS/UEFI → GRUB 2 (custom mOSs theme)
    → Linux 6.6 kernel (silent, loglevel=3)
    → /init (custom PID-1 shell script)
        → mount proc/sys/dev/run/tmp
        → mdev -s  (device population)
        → modprobe GPU / input / sound drivers
        → moss-bridge --daemonize
        → aplay chime.mp3 (async)
        → setsid /bin/moss-shell </dev/tty1 >/dev/tty1
            → boot splash (eye ASCII + module loader)
            → login screen
            → terminal or wm mode
.fi

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B MOSS_BRIDGE_SOCK
Override the bridge socket path.
.TP
.B MOSS_CONFIG
Override the config file path.
.TP
.B TERM
Must be a colour-capable terminal (e.g., xterm-256color).
.TP
.B MOSS_MODE
Set to
.I compositor
in kernel cmdline to launch Wayland compositor instead of ncurses shell.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Normal exit.
.TP
.B 1
Initialisation failure (terminal unavailable, bridge not running).

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ncurses (3),
.BR sqlite3 (1),
.BR aplay (1),
.BR grub-mkrescue (1),
.BR proc (5)

.SH AUTHOR
maseratislick  —  Report bugs via Discord: maseratislick

.SH COPYRIGHT
mOSs is free software released under the MIT licence.
